help2/install.md, before:

# Installing iTunes on your PC

iTunes is a software application that runs on the PC to allow you to connect to your iOS device.
To use it with Park Observer, you do not need an Apple account, or access to the App Store,
or any other online services. The functionality you need has nothing to do with music.

**BE WARNED:** Getting iTunes installed and working correctly with the NPS/DOI software settings
can be the most troublesome part of working with Park Observer.  Please read these instructions
carefully.  The biggest source of trouble is using a version of iTunes that is incompatible with
our network -- it may run, but doesn't connect correctly to your device, or does not allow
application installation or file transfer.

**DO NOT install iTunes from the Apple website.** The Apple version 
is incompatible with the NPS settings for Windows 10.

If you already have iTunes installed, you can try to 
[connect your device to iTunes](#connect-device). If you are unable to connect to your
device, or unable to [install Park Observer](#install-app), or
[Add Files to Park Observer](#add-files), then
uninstall iTunes, and install the latest version per these instructions.

These instructions were written on September 2, 2020 with the following versions of software:

  * Windows 10 version 1809
  * iTunes 12.10.8.5

It is likely that these instructions will work with other versions if installed per the
following instructions. If these instructions do not work for you, 
please let us know what problems you are having, as well as which version of Windows
and iTunes you are using.  We will investigate and update these instructions as necessary.

### Launch the Windows Store

  - Click the start menu ![Windows Start Menu](./install_images/win_startmenu.png)
  - Type `store`
  - Press the Enter key

You will need to log into the Windows Store with your Microsoft Office 365
account. This account is tied to your NPS network account, so you may log
automatically.  If not you might be prompted with something like this:

![Windows Store Login1](./install_images/win_store_signin1.png)

or something like this:

![Windows Store Login2](./install_images/win_store_signin2.png)

Clicking `Continue` or `Next` will take you the DOI authentication page:
You will need to enter you network password (not your PIV PIN, but the one you have to change every 2 months)

![DOI Signin 1](./install_images/win_org_signin1.png)

then click `Sign In`.
You will then be told you need to provide additional information,
Scroll down and click on `Sign in with PIV Card`

![DOI Signin 2](./install_images/win_org_signin2.png)

Make sure your PIV card is inserted in the computer, and enter 
your PIN when prompted.
When you are logged into the Windows Store you should see something like the following:

![Windows Store](./install_images/win_windows_store.png)

### Download iTunes

In the Windows Store, click on the iTunes option, and the download will begin.

![iTunes Downloading](./install_images/win_itunes_downloading.png)

When the download is complete you will get a notification in the lower right.

![iTunes Downloaded](./install_images/win_itunes_download_complete.png)

Click the `Launch` button. Accept the license agreement and iTunes should launch.

Click `No Thanks` on the welcome screen

![iTunes Welcome](./install_images/win_itunes_welcome.png)

Ignore the options to go to or sign in the the iTunes store. You do not need to log into the Apple Store, the iTunes store, or any other service.  When iTunes finishes launching,
you should see a screen similar to the following:

![Default iTunes Window](./install_images/win_itunes.png)


# Connecting your device to iTunes

*If you get any errors in this process and you cannot see your device in iTunes,
the first thing to suspect is the version of iTunes on your PC.
Please check the help page on [Installing iTunes](#install-itunes) to ensure
you are using the correct version.  Delete and reinstall
iTunes (**per the instructions!**) before continuing.*

Use a USB to lightning (charging) cable to connect your device to the PC.
The first time you connect your device, you will see a notification that
iTunes is setting up your device. You will see another notification when it is done.

You will be asked if you want to allow the computer to access the device.
Make sure your device is on and unlocked.

![Allow computer access to device](./install_images/itunes_request_access.png)

Then click `continue`.

You will be prompted on your device to trust the computer.

![iPad - Trust this computer?](./install_images/ipad_trust_this_computer.jpeg)

Tap on `Trust` and enter your device pass code.

You may then get prompted by iTunes to upgrade your device.

![iTunes - upgrade device](./install_images/itunes_upgrade_device.png)

I encourage you to keep your device up to date, however you can skip this step
(click `cancel`) and upgrade your device later if you want.
I prefer to upgrade my device over WiFi, and not via iTunes.

If your device is successfully connected to iTunes, you will see a mobile device
icon in the top left of the iTunes screen

![iTunes screen with device connected](./install_images/itunes_select_device.png)

You are now ready to [Install Park Observer](#install-app),
or [Install Additional Files](#add-files)
after Park Observer has already been installed.


# Installing Park Observer

* You will need to download the installation file (*.ipa) from the downloads
page to your desktop (or folder of your choice).
* Ensure that your device is on and unlocked.
* Start iTunes on your PC: Start menu, type itunes, press enter key
* Connect your device to the PC.
  If you have trouble with this step, please check your version of iTunes
  and the instructions for [Installing iTunes](#install-itunes),
  and [connecting your device to the PC](#connect-device)
* Drag the installation (*.ipa) file from your windows desktop (or folder of your choice)
to the name of your device in the table of contents in iTunes.

![iTunes Screen With Device Connected](./install_images/itunes_install_drop_zone.png)
 
This area will get a blue halo when the drop will work and the dragged file will
display `Link` when it can be dropped. The dragged file will show a red "no entry"
circle ( 🚫) when it cannot be dropped. It is not enough just to see the `Link` text,
because that will appears when you are over other parts of the screen.
You need to see the blue highlight of your device name.

Dropping the install file on the device in iTunes will begin the installation.

![iTunes Installation Progress](./install_images/itunes_install_progress.png)

If it complete successfully, you will have a Park Observer 2.0 icon ![Park Observer 2.0 icon](./install_images/park_observer_icon.png)
on your device (check all the screens if you do not see it).

You can now [disconnect your device](#disconnect-device).


# Launching Park Observer

Tap the Park Observer 2.0 icon ![Park Observer 2.0 icon](./install_images/park_observer_icon.png) on your device.

If this is a first install of Park Observer you will see this warning

![Untrusted Enterprise Developer](./install_images/iphone_untrusted_enterprise_developer.jpeg)

In order for Park Observer to run on your device you must trust the developers
at the National Park Service.  You only need to do this once, so you will not see
this warning if you have Park Observer 1.x or 2.x) already installed.

To enable Park Observer, you must have internet access. The trust process requires
validating the developer certificates in Park Observer with Apple's servers.  Typically
you cannot access Apple's servers from the Arrowhead WiFi, so if the following step
fails, then either 1) turn off WiFi and use cellular data (if available on your device),
or 2) connect to different WiFi (home, cafe, airport, etc.) and try again.

  1. Launch the Settings app ![Settings App Icon](./install_images/iphone_settings_icon.jpeg)
  2. Select `General`
  3. At the bottom of the list, tap on `Device Management`, then `National Park Service`

  ![Settings App Page 1](./install_images/iphone_trust_settings_1.jpeg) ![Settings App Page 2](./install_images/iphone_trust_settings_2.jpeg)
  
  4. Then tap on `Trust "National Park Service"`
  5. In the pop up alert box, tap on `Trust`

  ![Settings App Page 3](./install_images/iphone_trust_settings_4.jpeg)

  6. This should complete the trust process.  Return to the home screen and 
  try running Park Observer again.

If Park Observer launches successfully, you should see a screen like this:

 ![Initial Screen](./install_images/ipad_initial_screen.jpeg)
 
On the first tap
of the `start track log` button ![Tracklog Button](./install_images/ipad_tracklog_button.jpeg)
or the `GPS` Button ![GPS Button](./install_images/ipad_gps_button.jpeg),
you will be prompted to allow location services.

![Allow Location Services](./install_images/ipad_allow_locations.jpeg)

You should tap `Allow While Using App`.
Park Observer expects to use your GPS, and functionality will be greatly limited
without location services.

If you enable background track logging (in the settings menu) you will be prompted again.

![Allow Location Services Always](./install_images/ipad_change_to_always_allow.jpeg)

Select `Change to Always Allow`.  You may get prompted again in a few days to confirm that you
are still OK with background location data collection. You can change your
choice at any time in the settings application, and Park Observer should respond accordingly, however
you may lose functionality.

At this point you might want to [load your own protocols and basemaps](#add-files),
or begin playing with the sample survey (See [Getting Started](user_guide.html) for help).


# Adding Files to Park Observer

**NOTE:** You will not be able to add files until Park Observer has run at least once.

The process is the same for 

* Basemap tile package (*.tpk) files
* Existing survey archive (*.poz) files
* Survey protocol (*.obsprot) files

You can download [protocols](../protocols2) and [basemaps](../maps2) from this website, 
or you can make your own [protocols](index.html#new-protocol) and [basemaps](index.html#new-map).  The files you
wish to add to Park Observer will need to be on your PC.

To add any of these file to Park Observer

1. Download or create the files on your PC.
2. Ensure that your device is on and unlocked.
3. Start iTunes on your PC: Start menu, type itunes, press enter key
4. Connect your device to the PC.
   If you have trouble with this step, please check your version of iTunes
   and the instructions for [Installing iTunes](#install-itunes),
   and [connecting your device to the PC](#connect-device)
5. Tap on the device icon in iTunes

![iTunes Select Device](./install_images/itunes_select_device.png)

and you will see the device details

![iTunes Device Details](./install_images/itunes_device_details.png)

6. Tap on File Sharing

![iTunes File Sharing](./install_images/itunes_file_sharing.png)

7. Tap on Park Observer 2.0 icon to see the list of Park Observer Documents

![iTunes Park Observer Files](./install_images/itunes_file_sharing2.png)

8. Select the file(s) in windows file explorer that you want to add to Park Observer
  and drag and drop them onto the list of files in iTunes.  The list of files should highlight
with a blue focus ring, and display `link` when the files can be dropped. 

9. When you "drop" the files they will be copied to the device. If the files already exist
on your device, you will be warned:

![iTunes File conflict warning](./install_images/itunes_file_conflict.png)

select your preferred option to continue.

[Disconnect your device](#disconnect-device) when you are done adding files.


# Removing files from Park Observer

Follow steps 2 through 7 in [Adding Files to Park Observer](#add-files).

To copy files from your device to the PC, select the files you want in the list of
Park Observer Documents in iTunes and drag/drop them onto your windows desktop,
or a folder of your choice.

To delete files from Park Observer with iTunes, select the files and press
the delete key on your keyboard. 
You will be warned

![iTunes file delete warning](./install_images/itunes_file_delete_warning.png)

Click `Delete` to delete the files or `Cancel` to abort and leave the files on your device.

[Disconnect your device](#disconnect-device) when you are done deleting files.


# Disconnecting your device

To safely disconnect your device from iTunes, click on the device icon

![iTunes Select Device](./install_images/itunes_select_device.png)

Then click on the eject button

![iTunes Eject Device](./install_images/itunes_eject_device.png)

You can now disconnect the cable from the device and the PC.

Commit message:

Add master markdown files for the help documents

help2/install.md, after:

This file allows me to edit the content of the install.html file in markdown.
This file is considered the source of the content for each of the sections
(aside from the header) in install.html.

To update install.html, copy/paste each of the sections from here to a
markdown to html converter and paste into the appropriate section of install.html


# Installing iTunes on your PC

iTunes is a software application that runs on the PC to allow you to connect to your iOS device.
To use it with Park Observer, you do not need an Apple account, or access to the App Store,
or any other online services. The functionality you need has nothing to do with music.

**BE WARNED:** Getting iTunes installed and working correctly with the NPS/DOI software settings
can be the most troublesome part of working with Park Observer.  Please read these instructions
carefully.  The biggest source of trouble is using a version of iTunes that is incompatible with
our network -- it may run, but doesn't connect correctly to your device, or does not allow
application installation or file transfer.

**DO NOT install iTunes from the Apple website.** The Apple version 
is incompatible with the NPS settings for Windows 10.

If you already have iTunes installed, you can try to 
[connect your device to iTunes](#connect-device). If you are unable to connect to your
device, or unable to [install Park Observer](#install-app), or
[Add Files to Park Observer](#add-files), then
uninstall iTunes, and install the latest version per these instructions.

These instructions were written on September 2, 2020 with the following versions of software:

  * Windows 10 version 1809
  * iTunes 12.10.8.5

It is likely that these instructions will work with other versions if installed per the
following instructions. If these instructions do not work for you, 
please let us know what problems you are having, as well as which version of Windows
and iTunes you are using.  We will investigate and update these instructions as necessary.

### Launch the Windows Store

  - Click the start menu ![Windows Start Menu](./install_images/win_startmenu.png)
  - Type `store`
  - Press the Enter key

You will need to log into the Windows Store with your Microsoft Office 365
account. This account is tied to your NPS network account, so you may log
automatically.  If not you might be prompted with something like this:

![Windows Store Login1](./install_images/win_store_signin1.png)

or something like this:

![Windows Store Login2](./install_images/win_store_signin2.png)

Clicking `Continue` or `Next` will take you the DOI authentication page:
You will need to enter you network password (not your PIV PIN, but the one you have to change every 2 months)

![DOI Signin 1](./install_images/win_org_signin1.png)

then click `Sign In`.
You will then be told you need to provide additional information,
Scroll down and click on `Sign in with PIV Card`

![DOI Signin 2](./install_images/win_org_signin2.png)

Make sure your PIV card is inserted in the computer, and enter 
your PIN when prompted.
When you are logged into the Windows Store you should see something like the following:

![Windows Store](./install_images/win_windows_store.png)

### Download iTunes

In the Windows Store, click on the iTunes option, and the download will begin.

![iTunes Downloading](./install_images/win_itunes_downloading.png)

When the download is complete you will get a notification in the lower right.

![iTunes Downloaded](./install_images/win_itunes_download_complete.png)

Click the `Launch` button. Accept the license agreement and iTunes should launch.

Click `No Thanks` on the welcome screen

![iTunes Welcome](./install_images/win_itunes_welcome.png)

Ignore the options to go to or sign in the the iTunes store. You do not need to log into the Apple Store, the iTunes store, or any other service.  When iTunes finishes launching,
you should see a screen similar to the following:

![Default iTunes Window](./install_images/win_itunes.png)


# Connecting your device to iTunes

*If you get any errors in this process and you cannot see your device in iTunes,
the first thing to suspect is the version of iTunes on your PC.
Please check the help page on [Installing iTunes](#install-itunes) to ensure
you are using the correct version.  Delete and reinstall
iTunes (**per the instructions!**) before continuing.*

Use a USB to lightning (charging) cable to connect your device to the PC.
The first time you connect your device, you will see a notification that
iTunes is setting up your device. You will see another notification when it is done.

You will be asked if you want to allow the computer to access the device.
Make sure your device is on and unlocked.

![Allow computer access to device](./install_images/itunes_request_access.png)

Then click `continue`.

You will be prompted on your device to trust the computer.

![iPad - Trust this computer?](./install_images/ipad_trust_this_computer.jpeg)

Tap on `Trust` and enter your device pass code.

You may then get prompted by iTunes to upgrade your device.

![iTunes - upgrade device](./install_images/itunes_upgrade_device.png)

I encourage you to keep your device up to date, however you can skip this step
(click `cancel`) and upgrade your device later if you want.
I prefer to upgrade my device over WiFi, and not via iTunes.

If your device is successfully connected to iTunes, you will see a mobile device
icon in the top left of the iTunes screen

![iTunes screen with device connected](./install_images/itunes_select_device.png)

You are now ready to [Install Park Observer](#install-app),
or [Install Additional Files](#add-files)
after Park Observer has already been installed.


# Installing Park Observer

* You will need to download the installation file (*.ipa) from the downloads
page to your desktop (or folder of your choice).
* Ensure that your device is on and unlocked.
* Start iTunes on your PC: Start menu, type itunes, press enter key
* Connect your device to the PC.
  If you have trouble with this step, please check your version of iTunes
  and the instructions for [Installing iTunes](#install-itunes),
  and [connecting your device to the PC](#connect-device)
* Drag the installation (*.ipa) file from your windows desktop (or folder of your choice)
to the name of your device in the table of contents in iTunes.

![iTunes Screen With Device Connected](./install_images/itunes_install_drop_zone.png)
 
This area will get a blue halo when the drop will work and the dragged file will
display `Link` when it can be dropped. The dragged file will show a red "no entry"
circle ( 🚫) when it cannot be dropped. It is not enough just to see the `Link` text,
because that will appears when you are over other parts of the screen.
You need to see the blue highlight of your device name.

Dropping the install file on the device in iTunes will begin the installation.

![iTunes Installation Progress](./install_images/itunes_install_progress.png)

If it complete successfully, you will have a Park Observer 2.0 icon ![Park Observer 2.0 icon](./install_images/park_observer_icon.png)
on your device (check all the screens if you do not see it).

You can now [disconnect your device](#disconnect-device).


# Launching Park Observer

Tap the Park Observer 2.0 icon ![Park Observer 2.0 icon](./install_images/park_observer_icon.png) on your device.

If this is a first install of Park Observer you will see this warning

![Untrusted Enterprise Developer](./install_images/iphone_untrusted_enterprise_developer.jpeg)

In order for Park Observer to run on your device you must trust the developers
at the National Park Service.  You only need to do this once, so you will not see
this warning if you have Park Observer 1.x or 2.x) already installed.

To enable Park Observer, you must have internet access. The trust process requires
validating the developer certificates in Park Observer with Apple's servers.  Typically
you cannot access Apple's servers from the Arrowhead WiFi, so if the following step
fails, then either 1) turn off WiFi and use cellular data (if available on your device),
or 2) connect to different WiFi (home, cafe, airport, etc.) and try again.

  1. Launch the Settings app ![Settings App Icon](./install_images/iphone_settings_icon.jpeg)
  2. Select `General`
  3. At the bottom of the list, tap on `Device Management`, then `National Park Service`

  ![Settings App Page 1](./install_images/iphone_trust_settings_1.jpeg) ![Settings App Page 2](./install_images/iphone_trust_settings_2.jpeg)
  
  4. Then tap on `Trust "National Park Service"`
  5. In the pop up alert box, tap on `Trust`

  ![Settings App Page 3](./install_images/iphone_trust_settings_4.jpeg)

  6. This should complete the trust process.  Return to the home screen and 
  try running Park Observer again.

If Park Observer launches successfully, you should see a screen like this:

 ![Initial Screen](./install_images/ipad_initial_screen.jpeg)
 
On the first tap
of the `start track log` button ![Tracklog Button](./install_images/ipad_tracklog_button.jpeg)
or the `GPS` Button ![GPS Button](./install_images/ipad_gps_button.jpeg),
you will be prompted to allow location services.

![Allow Location Services](./install_images/ipad_allow_locations.jpeg)

You should tap `Allow While Using App`.
Park Observer expects to use your GPS, and functionality will be greatly limited
without location services.

If you enable background track logging (in the settings menu) you will be prompted again.

![Allow Location Services Always](./install_images/ipad_change_to_always_allow.jpeg)

Select `Change to Always Allow`.  You may get prompted again in a few days to confirm that you
are still OK with background location data collection. You can change your
choice at any time in the settings application, and Park Observer should respond accordingly, however
you may lose functionality.

At this point you might want to [load your own protocols and basemaps](#add-files),
or begin playing with the sample survey (See [Getting Started](user_guide.html) for help).


# Adding Files to Park Observer

**NOTE:** You will not be able to add files until Park Observer has run at least once.

The process is the same for 

* Basemap tile package (*.tpk) files
* Existing survey archive (*.poz) files
* Survey protocol (*.obsprot) files

You can download [protocols](../protocols2) and [basemaps](../maps2) from this website, 
or you can make your own [protocols](index.html#new-protocol) and [basemaps](index.html#new-map).  The files you
wish to add to Park Observer will need to be on your PC.

To add any of these file to Park Observer

1. Download or create the files on your PC.
2. Ensure that your device is on and unlocked.
3. Start iTunes on your PC: Start menu, type itunes, press enter key
4. Connect your device to the PC.
   If you have trouble with this step, please check your version of iTunes
   and the instructions for [Installing iTunes](#install-itunes),
   and [connecting your device to the PC](#connect-device)
5. Tap on the device icon in iTunes

![iTunes Select Device](./install_images/itunes_select_device.png)

and you will see the device details

![iTunes Device Details](./install_images/itunes_device_details.png)

6. Tap on File Sharing

![iTunes File Sharing](./install_images/itunes_file_sharing.png)

7. Tap on Park Observer 2.0 icon to see the list of Park Observer Documents

![iTunes Park Observer Files](./install_images/itunes_file_sharing2.png)

8. Select the file(s) in windows file explorer that you want to add to Park Observer
  and drag and drop them onto the list of files in iTunes.  The list of files should highlight
with a blue focus ring, and display `link` when the files can be dropped. 

9. When you "drop" the files they will be copied to the device. If the files already exist
on your device, you will be warned:

![iTunes File conflict warning](./install_images/itunes_file_conflict.png)

select your preferred option to continue.

[Disconnect your device](#disconnect-device) when you are done adding files.


# Removing files from Park Observer

Follow steps 2 through 7 in [Adding Files to Park Observer](#add-files).

To copy files from your device to the PC, select the files you want in the list of
Park Observer Documents in iTunes and drag/drop them onto your windows desktop,
or a folder of your choice.

To delete files from Park Observer with iTunes, select the files and press
the delete key on your keyboard. 
You will be warned

![iTunes file delete warning](./install_images/itunes_file_delete_warning.png)

Click `Delete` to delete the files or `Cancel` to abort and leave the files on your device.

[Disconnect your device](#disconnect-device) when you are done deleting files.


# Disconnecting your device

To safely disconnect your device from iTunes, click on the device icon

![iTunes Select Device](./install_images/itunes_select_device.png)

Then click on the eject button

![iTunes Eject Device](./install_images/itunes_eject_device.png)

You can now disconnect the cable from the device and the PC.
